README.md, before:

# Talkatoo Translator

The goal of this project was to create a tool for recognizing and translating the moon names mentioned by Talkatoo in Super Mario Odyssey. The completed project allows the user to do runs of Talkatoo% in any language SMO supports, and could be a significant timesave over English, as there is less text to scroll through in some other languages. It may also serve as a project of interest for those users looking to learn the moon names in other languages. Currently, Simplified Chinese and Traditional Chinese are the most optimized, Korean has typically been successful, and all other languages are mostly usable but not fully tested/optimized.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/58895947/226770639-0f0ed7f8-4fac-45f6-9819-86bdd14fc301.png)

# Setup Instructions (no programming required)
1. Download the talkatoo-translator.zip file of the latest release: https://github.com/AzHarcos/talkatoo-translator/releases
2. Find the downloaded zip file in your file system and unzip it in a location you can find. Here we'll use the example that you unzip to the folder ```C:/Users/biakko/Downloads/talkatoo-translator```, replace your path along the way as needed. Note that I will be using the test release, ```talkatoo-translator-1.0.0-testing```.

3. To run the application, you'll need Python 3 installed. While newer and some older versions will also work, testing was done on version 3.10.10, so this is the recommended version. You can find it here: https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-31010/. If you're on Windows or Mac, the installer is likely easiest. If you're on Linux, you can use the tarball.
    - If you use the installer, be sure to check the box that says "add python.exe to PATH" on the first screen, and then you can use the default installation. Should you wish to customize your installation, be sure that the "pip" box is checked.
    - Otherwise, you'll need to manually add Python to your PATH (https://realpython.com/add-python-to-path/) and install pip (https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/installation/).

4. Open your terminal. If you're on Mac or Linux, it's an app called "Terminal", if you're on Windows then use the Command Prompt. (If you're not sure how to find it, use the search bar).
5. Run the command ```python --version``` by typing it out and pressing the Enter key. On Mac and Linux you might need to use ```python3 --version``` instead. If it gives an error, Python was not added to your PATH. Follow instructions here to fix this: https://realpython.com/add-python-to-path/. If it tells you that the version is 3.10.10, then it has been set up correctly. If it's another 3.X version, then your default version of Python is not 3.10.10, but your program will likely still work.
6. Install the necessary dependencies (external Python code used within our project).
   - Run the command ```cd talkatoo_path``` in the terminal, replacing talkatoo_path with the full file path to your *inner* talkatoo directory (the one that contains the README, Talkatoo.py, and so on). For example, ```cd C:/Users/biakko/Downloads/talkatoo-translator/talkatoo-translator-1.0.0-testing```.
   - Run ```pip install -r requirements.txt``` to install the necessary packages
   - If pip is not properly installed, follow the instructions at https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/installation/ and try again.
   - If one or more installations don't work, you can try to install the proper versions of the packages individually using ```pip install package_name==version```. An example, ```pip install pillow==9.4.0```.

# Run the program
To run the program:
- If you prefer to use your command line/terminal:
    - Run ```cd talkatoo_path``` in the command line/terminal on your machine, where talkatoo_path is your *inner* talkatoo directory. In this example, the command is ```cd C:/Users/biakko/Downloads/talkatoo-translator/talkatoo-translator-1.0.0-testing```.
    - Run ```python Talkatoo.py``` on Windows, or ```python3 Talkatoo.py``` on Linux/Mac.
    - The program should now be running (it may take several seconds to boot up).
- IDLE:
    - IDLE is a free Python interpreter that comes with Python (unless you chose to exclude it in the custom installation). You can just open Talkatoo.py within the IDLE application and select "Run" on the top menu, then "Run Module".
- Or use an interpreter of your choice (PyCharm, Spyder, Visual Studio Code, Geany, etc.).
If you encounter errors, you do not have the packages properly installed. You can check installation status and version using ```pip show package_name``` in your command line/terminal(ex. ```pip show easyocr```). If it does not match with the one in requirements.txt, then install the proper version according to step 5 of the Setup Instructions.

# How to use
- In the settings menu, ensure that the video source is your capture card by clicking the "Preview Image" button.
- Ensure that the languages and toggles are set to your preferences.
- Kingdom transitions, receiving moons from Talkatoo and marking moons as collected will all work automatically.
- To double-check specific moons you can use the complete moon list that is being displayed on the right side of the screen for each kingdom.

- In case the recognition does not work perfectly or you want to make changes, you can do so with the buttons in the GUI.
    - You can use the kingdom list to manually add moons to the Pending list by clicking on the name.
    - If you collect a pending moon and it does not get recognized, click on its name to manually mark it as collected.
    - If the program erroneously marks a moon as collected, you can move it back to the Pending list by clicking on it if it was previously mentioned by Talkatoo
    - If there are multiple recognized possibilities for a moon received from Talkatoo, you can select the correct option in the GUI.
    - If multiple options are recognized for a collected moon, nothing will happen to ensure the wrong moon will not be not marked.
    - When hovering on pending or collected moons, a delete button will be shown so wrong matches can be completely removed from both lists.


# Troubleshooting
- My capture card isn't showing up!
    - Some capture cards aren't allowed to be open in multiple places. If you have one of these and it's open in OBS or another place, then you won't be able to open it here. To solve this, there are a few options. For all of these, try to ensure your resolution is at least 1280x720.
        - The first will only be helpful for some people, called Elgato StreamLink. You can find out about it here: https://help.elgato.com/hc/en-us/articles/360028241631.
        - For lower-end PCs and capture cards, the best current option is the OBS Virtual Camera. To use it, you'll want this plugin: https://github.com/Avasam/obs-virtual-cam/releases. You can follow the instructions on the main page to install it: https://github.com/Avasam/obs-virtual-cam. You can now open the OBS Virtual Camera in the Talkatoo app, and use your OBS canvas as the input device. For this, make sure that the game takes up the full screen, and that you are not blocking the areas marked on the below image, as these are used for various parts of the model. Unfortunately, the resolution tends to be very low, and the program will likely suffer for it.
![Mario](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/58895947/227270510-0471c263-b695-4e2c-8eef-d1427830ae74.jpg)
        - We are currently working on better solutions to this issue.
        
        
- Nothing is working!
    - The most likely case is that you're either looking at the wrong video source, or that your capture card borders are improperly set. This can be fixed in the GUI, where you can set the video source and check sample images to see if it looks right. Also ensure that your input language is set correctly.
    - A rarer but possible issue is that your capture card has highly distorted colors or image output dimensions. We do not currently have correction algorithms in place. The best current fix is to try to correct the issues manually in an OBS scene using color filters and cropping, and then use the Virtual Camera plugin to use your OBS canvas as video input to our program.


- The program sometimes misses moons from Talkatoo!
    - The likely issue is run speed. This program has typically been somewhere around 30fps on average, and this is what it's designed for. On old or slow or somewhat overloaded machines where framerate drops below ~15, this may prove to be a problem. The best fix is to ensure that Python is running in the foreground with limited background activity.
    - Other issues might involve capture card color/dimension distortion or resolutions issues.
    
    
- The program sometimes recognizes the wrong moon!
    - Unfortunately, this is an external tool and we do not have perfect game information. We have done our best to make it as robust as possible, but it is not perfect. Sometimes, only partial words will be read, at others the characters will be incorrectly recognized or dropped, and in exceedingly rare cases some extraneous text or white pixels may count as Talkatoo text or a moon. You are welcome to check the output logs in the Python console and report failures to us for future improvement.


# Process
For those curious, here's a more detailed description of the Talkatoo translation process:
- Pull raw image from USB capture card (using cv2 and PIL)
- Turn partial image into black text on a white background
- Run text detection algorithm
- If text is possible, run Optical Character Recognition
- Clean up OCR output by removing whitespace, replacing common mistakes, etc.
- Check string matches to all moons in the current kingdom using a language-dependent score function
- If the score for the best one is high enough, send the best matches (uncertainty outputs multiple matches) to the GUI

In addition:
- Check kingdom every few seconds by running a classifier on the purple coin counter
- Recognize moon names as they come (similar to Talkatoo processing) and automatically mark on the GUI
- Recognize story/multi moon names as they come (similar to Talkatoo processing) and automatically mark on the GUI

GUI information:
- The GUI was build using the Vue Framework and communicates with the Python script using Eel (https://github.com/python-eel/Eel)
- Eel starts a local Bottle server on localhost:8083 when the Python script is run and allows bidirectional communication between Python and JS via websocket
- The source code of the gui can be found in the /vue directory but to run the tool only the bundled contents (generated with Vite) in /gui are necessary


# Reporting Issues
- To report any GUI bugs or display suggestions, message AzHarcos#8767 on Discord.
- To report failures in moon/text recognition, try to find the problematic part of the output logs in the Python console (if applicable) and send that and a description of what went wrong to biakko#9890 on Discord. Note that this program is very consistent but not perfect, and that any changes will typically require a large amount of reworking and testing.


# Credits
- AzHarcos - User Interface, Graphics
- Biakko - Moon Recognition

Commit message:

write pending GUI moons to pending-moons.txt

README.md, after:

# Talkatoo Translator

The goal of this project was to create a tool for recognizing and translating the moon names mentioned by Talkatoo in Super Mario Odyssey. The completed project allows the user to do runs of Talkatoo% in any language SMO supports, and could be a significant timesave over English, as there is less text to scroll through in some other languages. It may also serve as a project of interest for those users looking to learn the moon names in other languages. Currently, Simplified Chinese and Traditional Chinese are the most optimized, Korean has typically been successful, and all other languages are mostly usable but not fully tested/optimized.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/58895947/226770639-0f0ed7f8-4fac-45f6-9819-86bdd14fc301.png)

# Setup Instructions (no programming required)
1. Download the talkatoo-translator.zip file of the latest release: https://github.com/AzHarcos/talkatoo-translator/releases
2. Find the downloaded zip file in your file system and unzip it in a location you can find. Here we'll use the example that you unzip to the folder ```C:/Users/biakko/Downloads/talkatoo-translator```, replace your path along the way as needed. Note that I will be using the test release, ```talkatoo-translator-1.0.0-testing```.

3. To run the application, you'll need Python 3 installed. While newer and some older versions will also work, testing was done on version 3.10.10, so this is the recommended version. You can find it here: https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-31010/. If you're on Windows or Mac, the installer is likely easiest. If you're on Linux, you can use the tarball.
    - If you use the installer, be sure to check the box that says "add python.exe to PATH" on the first screen, and then you can use the default installation. Should you wish to customize your installation, be sure that the "pip" box is checked.
    - Otherwise, you'll need to manually add Python to your PATH (https://realpython.com/add-python-to-path/) and install pip (https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/installation/).

4. Open your terminal. If you're on Mac or Linux, it's an app called "Terminal", if you're on Windows then use the Command Prompt. (If you're not sure how to find it, use the search bar).
5. Run the command ```python --version``` by typing it out and pressing the Enter key. On Mac and Linux you might need to use ```python3 --version``` instead. If it gives an error, Python was not added to your PATH. Follow instructions here to fix this: https://realpython.com/add-python-to-path/. If it tells you that the version is 3.10.10, then it has been set up correctly. If it's another 3.X version, then your default version of Python is not 3.10.10, but your program will likely still work.
6. Install the necessary dependencies (external Python code used within our project).
   - Run the command ```cd talkatoo_path``` in the terminal, replacing talkatoo_path with the full file path to your *inner* talkatoo directory (the one that contains the README, Talkatoo.py, and so on). For example, ```cd C:/Users/biakko/Downloads/talkatoo-translator/talkatoo-translator-1.0.0-testing```.
   - Run ```pip install -r requirements.txt``` to install the necessary packages
   - If pip is not properly installed, follow the instructions at https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/installation/ and try again.
   - If one or more installations don't work, you can try to install the proper versions of the packages individually using ```pip install package_name==version```. An example, ```pip install pillow==9.4.0```.

# Run the program
To run the program:
- If you prefer to use your command line/terminal:
    - Run ```cd talkatoo_path``` in the command line/terminal on your machine, where talkatoo_path is your *inner* talkatoo directory. In this example, the command is ```cd C:/Users/biakko/Downloads/talkatoo-translator/talkatoo-translator-1.0.0-testing```.
    - Run ```python Talkatoo.py``` on Windows, or ```python3 Talkatoo.py``` on Linux/Mac.
    - The program should now be running (it may take several seconds to boot up).
- IDLE:
    - IDLE is a free Python interpreter that comes with Python (unless you chose to exclude it in the custom installation). You can just open Talkatoo.py within the IDLE application and select "Run" on the top menu, then "Run Module".
- Or use an interpreter of your choice (PyCharm, Spyder, Visual Studio Code, Geany, etc.).
If you encounter errors, you do not have the packages properly installed. You can check installation status and version using ```pip show package_name``` in your command line/terminal(ex. ```pip show easyocr```). If it does not match with the one in requirements.txt, then install the proper version according to step 5 of the Setup Instructions.

# How to use
- In the settings menu, ensure that the video source is your capture card by clicking the "Preview Image" button.
- Ensure that the languages and toggles are set to your preferences.
- Kingdom transitions, receiving moons from Talkatoo and marking moons as collected will all work automatically.
- If you wish to display the list of pending moons in OBS you can do so using the generated file ```pending-moons.txt``` in the talkatoo directory.It will contain the pending moons of the kingdom that's currently selected in the GUI, ignoring entries with multiple possible moon options
- To double-check specific moons you can use the complete moon list that is being displayed on the right side of the screen for each kingdom.

- In case the recognition does not work perfectly or you want to make changes, you can do so with the buttons in the GUI.
    - You can use the kingdom list to manually add moons to the Pending list by clicking on the name.
    - If you collect a pending moon and it does not get recognized, click on its name to manually mark it as collected.
    - If the program erroneously marks a moon as collected, you can move it back to the Pending list by clicking on it if it was previously mentioned by Talkatoo
    - If there are multiple recognized possibilities for a moon received from Talkatoo, you can select the correct option in the GUI.
    - If multiple options are recognized for a collected moon, nothing will happen to ensure the wrong moon will not be not marked.
    - When hovering on pending or collected moons, a delete button will be shown so wrong matches can be completely removed from both lists.


# Troubleshooting
- My capture card isn't showing up!
    - Some capture cards aren't allowed to be open in multiple places. If you have one of these and it's open in OBS or another place, then you won't be able to open it here. To solve this, there are a few options. For all of these, try to ensure your resolution is at least 1280x720.
        - The first will only be helpful for some people, called Elgato StreamLink. You can find out about it here: https://help.elgato.com/hc/en-us/articles/360028241631.
        - For lower-end PCs and capture cards, the best current option is the OBS Virtual Camera. To use it, you'll want this plugin: https://github.com/Avasam/obs-virtual-cam/releases. You can follow the instructions on the main page to install it: https://github.com/Avasam/obs-virtual-cam. You can now open the OBS Virtual Camera in the Talkatoo app, and use your OBS canvas as the input device. For this, make sure that the game takes up the full screen, and that you are not blocking the areas marked on the below image, as these are used for various parts of the model. Unfortunately, the resolution tends to be very low, and the program will likely suffer for it.
![Mario](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/58895947/227270510-0471c263-b695-4e2c-8eef-d1427830ae74.jpg)
        - We are currently working on better solutions to this issue.
        
        
- Nothing is working!
    - The most likely case is that you're either looking at the wrong video source, or that your capture card borders are improperly set. This can be fixed in the GUI, where you can set the video source and check sample images to see if it looks right. Also ensure that your input language is set correctly.
    - A rarer but possible issue is that your capture card has highly distorted colors or image output dimensions. We do not currently have correction algorithms in place. The best current fix is to try to correct the issues manually in an OBS scene using color filters and cropping, and then use the Virtual Camera plugin to use your OBS canvas as video input to our program.


- The program sometimes misses moons from Talkatoo!
    - The likely issue is run speed. This program has typically been somewhere around 30fps on average, and this is what it's designed for. On old or slow or somewhat overloaded machines where framerate drops below ~15, this may prove to be a problem. The best fix is to ensure that Python is running in the foreground with limited background activity.
    - Other issues might involve capture card color/dimension distortion or resolutions issues.
    
    
- The program sometimes recognizes the wrong moon!
    - Unfortunately, this is an external tool and we do not have perfect game information. We have done our best to make it as robust as possible, but it is not perfect. Sometimes, only partial words will be read, at others the characters will be incorrectly recognized or dropped, and in exceedingly rare cases some extraneous text or white pixels may count as Talkatoo text or a moon. You are welcome to check the output logs in the Python console and report failures to us for future improvement.


# Process
For those curious, here's a more detailed description of the Talkatoo translation process:
- Pull raw image from USB capture card (using cv2 and PIL)
- Turn partial image into black text on a white background
- Run text detection algorithm
- If text is possible, run Optical Character Recognition
- Clean up OCR output by removing whitespace, replacing common mistakes, etc.
- Check string matches to all moons in the current kingdom using a language-dependent score function
- If the score for the best one is high enough, send the best matches (uncertainty outputs multiple matches) to the GUI

In addition:
- Check kingdom every few seconds by running a classifier on the purple coin counter
- Recognize moon names as they come (similar to Talkatoo processing) and automatically mark on the GUI
- Recognize story/multi moon names as they come (similar to Talkatoo processing) and automatically mark on the GUI

GUI information:
- The GUI was build using the Vue Framework and communicates with the Python script using Eel (https://github.com/python-eel/Eel)
- Eel starts a local Bottle server on localhost:8083 when the Python script is run and allows bidirectional communication between Python and JS via websocket
- The source code of the gui can be found in the /vue directory but to run the tool only the bundled contents (generated with Vite) in /gui are necessary


# Reporting Issues
- To report any GUI bugs or display suggestions, message AzHarcos#8767 on Discord.
- To report failures in moon/text recognition, try to find the problematic part of the output logs in the Python console (if applicable) and send that and a description of what went wrong to biakko#9890 on Discord. Note that this program is very consistent but not perfect, and that any changes will typically require a large amount of reworking and testing.


# Credits
- AzHarcos - User Interface, Graphics
- Biakko - Moon Recognition
